docs(blog): blog on why DuckDB is the default backend (#8378)
ibis-project/ibis: docs/posts/why-duckdb/index.qmd

---
title: "Why is DuckDB the default backend for Ibis?"
author: "Phillip Cloud"
date: "2024-02-16"
categories:
  - blog
  - community
---

## Why DuckDB?

Occasionally people ask us why DuckDB is the default backend.

This blog posts aims to address this question.

## A bit of history

For years, Ibis had no default backend. We had somewhat hidden functionality to
read parquet files with Pandas, but no one working on the project at the time
was comfortable making Pandas execution the default.

Pandas is great, but we didn't want to inherit all of its [technical
baggage](https://wesmckinney.com/blog/apache-arrow-pandas-internals/) for
users, especially new users, of Ibis.

> So, we decided not make any backend the official default because our primary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, we decided to not make any backend the official default because our primary
```

> So, we decided not make any backend the official default because our primary
> local backend wouldn't give users a good out-of-the-box experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, we decided not make any backend the official default because our primary
option for local execution wouldn't give users a good out-of-the-box experience.
```

as an option - just to avoid saying 'backend' so many times

Author: Is it even a word anymore?

## DuckDB

DuckDB came along as the new kid on the block a few years ago, offering the
uber-convenience of SQLite but for analytic use cases. It came with excellent
performance to boot.

It also had a thriving open source community and was built on a solid
foundation of decades of academic database research, both of which made us all
optimistic about its future.

It is an **excellent** engine for a use case that is critical for a great
experience when using Ibis: executing SQL against local data. In particular,

> DuckDB handles larger-than-memory CSV, Apache Parquet and JSON files with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DuckDB handles larger-than-memory CSV, Apache Parquet, and JSON files with
```

oxford comma 4 life

aplomb.

It was also a big plus that it had entry and exit points for existing ecosystem
tools like Apache Arrow, and yes, Pandas.

## Fast forward to today

DuckDB is now our the **primary** recommended Ibis backend for working with
local data.

After we release 9.0, the DuckDB backend will surpass all of our other local

> backends on all fronts--performance and feature set--including `AS OF JOIN`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
backends on all fronts—performance and feature set—including `AS OF JOIN`
```

Reviewer 2: this isn't clear when rendered in monospace, but what I'm suggesting here is to use em dashes ("—")

Reviewer: I like a good em dash.  Alternatively, we can also elimate the "all fronts" part and say

"...surpass all of our other local backends in both performance and feature set, including AS OF JOIN support."

Author: Went wit @gforsyth's suggestion and removed the emdashes.

support.

## What about other backends?

At the [time we made the
decision](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/tree/8ccb81d49e252b57310bdb3a97eeb77ef1d28bac)
to make DuckDB the default backend we had a few other options:

### Dask

Dask is great, but also inherits the technical baggage of pandas, the least
desirable aspect of which is Pandas type instability.

We thought it was uncontroversial that users should be able to handle strings
and nulls without worrying about the NULL/NaN problem that every Pandas and
Dask user must grapple with.

### Datafusion

> Datafusion wasn't feature complete enough for us to choose it as the default.

Reviewer: Maybe a gentle intro statement here?  "Datafusion has been improving steadily over the last few years, but..."

Author: Yep, good idea!

Author: Done.

was comfortable making pandas execution the default.

pandas is great, but we didn't want to inherit all of its [technical
baggage](https://wesmckinney.com/blog/apache-arrow-pandas-internals/) for
users, especially new users, of Ibis.

So, we decided to not make any backend the official default because our primary
option for local execution wouldn't give users a good out-of-the-box
experience.

## DuckDB

DuckDB came along as the new kid on the block a few years ago, offering the
uber-convenience of SQLite but for analytic use cases. It came with excellent
performance to boot.

It also had a thriving open source community and was built on a solid
foundation of decades of academic database research, both of which made us all
optimistic about its future.

It is an **excellent** engine for a use case that is critical for a great
experience when using Ibis: executing SQL against local data. In particular,
DuckDB handles larger-than-memory CSV, Apache Parquet, and JSON files with
aplomb.

It was also a big plus that it had entry and exit points for existing ecosystem
tools like Apache Arrow, and yes, pandas.

## Fast forward to today

> DuckDB is now our the **primary** recommended Ibis backend for working with
> local data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DuckDB is now the **primary** recommended Ibis backend for working with
local data.
```

or "our"

Author: Yep, I noticed this a few minutes ago, but haven't yet pushed :)

After we release 9.0, the DuckDB backend will surpass all of our other local
backends in both performance and feature set, including AS OF JOIN support.

## What about other backends?

At the [time we made the
decision](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/tree/8ccb81d49e252b57310bdb3a97eeb77ef1d28bac)
to make DuckDB the default backend we had a few other options:

### Dask

Dask is great, but also inherits the technical baggage of pandas, the least
desirable aspect of which is pandas type instability.

> We thought it was uncontroversial that users should be able to handle strings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We think users should be able to handle strings
```

?

Author: Much better than what I originally wrote!

optimistic about its future.

It is an **excellent** engine for a use case that is critical for a great
experience when using Ibis: executing SQL against local data. In particular,
DuckDB handles larger-than-memory CSV, Apache Parquet, and JSON files with
aplomb.

It was also a big plus that it had entry and exit points for existing ecosystem
tools like Apache Arrow, and yes, pandas.

## Fast forward to today

DuckDB is now the **primary** recommended Ibis backend for working with local
data.

After we release 9.0, the DuckDB backend will surpass all of our other local
backends in both performance and feature set, including AS OF JOIN support.

## What about other backends?

At the [time we made the
decision](https://github.com/ibis-project/ibis/tree/8ccb81d49e252b57310bdb3a97eeb77ef1d28bac)
to make DuckDB the default backend we had a few other options:

### Dask

Dask is great, but also inherits the technical baggage of pandas, the least
desirable aspect of which is pandas type instability.

We think that users should be able to handle strings and nulls without worrying
about the NULL/NaN problem that every pandas and Dask user must grapple with.

> ### DataFusion

Reviewer 3: Is there a way to get the Quarto render to render this header as "DataFusion" and not "Datafusion" as it does?
